It has been a while since my last blog post, but a recent experience inspired me to share some insights that I hope will be useful to others. It concerns a common point of confusion in C and C++: the `const` keyword.

In C and C++, the keyword `const` does not mean "constant"; it marks a variable as read-only within a scope.

This seems confusing. After all, "const" just a shortened version of "constant."  Beginner tutorials will tell you `const` stands for "constant". But this is because this lie simplifies the learning process. It would be confusing to tell a beginner, "`const` stands for read-only." You may have picked up on the technique of using lies of approximation while learning at school.

It is a misnomer. The developers of C, as amazing as they were, weren't perfect. An educator even made a video on the subject: [*Const int is not a constant.*](https://youtu.be/8a3HyL1VN0Q?si=VRajTKBb4GJVew5f)

Take the following example:
```c
void foo(const int bar) {
    const int result = fizzbuzz(bar);
}
```

In the `foo` function, the variable `bar` is passed in as a `const int`. This means that within the scope of `foo`, `bar` cannot be modified. Similarly, `result` is declared as `const`, meaning its value, once initialized by `fizzbuzz(bar)`, cannot be changed within its scope.

However, the value of `bar` itself can be different with each call to `foo`. `result` can also hold different values from call-to-call. These variables are read-only within a specific context, but they are not "constant" in the sense of being fixed for the entire duration of the program.

You might recognize this concept as *immutable*. For example, Zig uses `const` to mean immutable. But this is not the case in C and C++. Take this line:

```c
static volatile const int* input;
```

This is a readonly value for the compiler. However, it is also marked volatile. Some external hardware or thread might write to it. Thus, the correct terminology is *read-only*. A subtle, but important point.

If it was a constant, one would expect a constant to never change while the program is running. C++, and now C23, has a keyword for this: `constexpr`.

This distinction is important. Confusing read-only with constant can lead to misleading code. For example, some coding styles recommend capitalizing constant variables. Applying this rule to `const` parameters or local variables can be confusing, as their values are not truly constant across the program.

The Google C++ Style Guide lays out a consistent definition for "[constant names](https://google.github.io/styleguide/cppguide.html#Constant_Names)". There are two guidelines for use:

> Variables declared `constexpr` or `const`, and whose value is fixed for the duration of the program

and 

> variables with static storage duration i.e., statics and globals

They remove ambiguity.

Other languages handle this concept differently, which can help clarify the distinction. For example, Dart uses `const` for compile-time constants and `final` for variables that are assigned once (read-only). C# uses the `readonly` keyword, which is more descriptive. This leads to another lesson:

> Learn different languages. They give you a broader perspective that gives you a better understanding of the tools you've used for a long time.

Understanding the difference between "read-only" and "constant" is a subtle but important aspect of writing professional C and C++ code.
